Synthesis and Augmentation for Structured Data
Minh Le et al.
Advisor: Dr. Thuy Do
Department of Computer Science
Luther College
Introduction
Generating high-fidelity synthetic tabular data is
challenging due to complex column distributions
(multimodal, imbalanced) and mixed data types
(discrete/continuous). While generative models like
GANs (e.g., CTGAN, TVAE) have advanced the field, a
gap often remains between synthetic and real data
quality. This work aims to improve the realism of
generated synthetic structured data.
References
1. Breiman, Leo. "Random forests." Machine learning
45 (2001): 5-32.
2. Chen, Tianqi, and Carlos Guestrin. "Xgboost: A
scalable tree boosting system." Proceedings of the
22nd acm sigkdd international conference on
knowledge discovery and data mining. 2016.
3. Goodfellow, Ian, et al. "Generative adversarial
networks." Communications of the ACM 63.11
(2020): 139-144.
4. Xu, Lei, et al. "Modeling tabular data using
conditional gan." Advances in neural information
processing systems 32 (2019).
Conclusion
Æ Decoupled Synthesis Enhances Utility :
Generating features (X syn)a n dt a r g e t s
(ysyn) separately produces higher-quality
synthetic data compared to end-to-end
methods, evidenced by significantly
improved downstream F1-macro scores.
Æ Optimize Feature Generation :E x c l u d i n g
the target variable (y) during feature
synthesis is recommended; it offers
computational savings with negligible
impact on final model performance.
Results
Our decoupled synthesis approach significantly improves upon
standard end-to-end generation:
• Achieved an average F1-macro improvement of 0.0736 ( 10.86%
relative increase ) over baseline. This significant gain was
consistent across 6 datasets and various generative models
• Including target y during feature X synthesis offered negligible
benefit, yielding only a marginal (+ 0.3% F1-macro) and
statistically insignificant (p=0.5091) improvement. This indicates
potential for model simplification without performance loss
Future Work
More Validation: Evaluate the proposed
pipeline across a more extensive and diverse
range of datasets.
Task Expansion :A d a p ta n dt e s tt h e
decoupled approach for regression tasks, not
just classification.
Xsynthesizer Research:I m p l e m e n ta d v a n c e d
techniques (e.g., incorporating Fourier
features) to further improve the quality of the
feature synthesizer .
Data & Evaluation
We evaluate synthetic data quality using its practical
utility in a ML task across 6 datasets.
1. A Deep Neural Network (DNN) is trained only on
the generated synthetic data.
2. The DNN is then tested on unseen real data (the
test set).
3. We measure this performance using the F1-
macro score (ranging from 0 to 1), where higher
scores indicate better recall & precision.
Strong performance by the DNN on real data
signifies that the synthetic data realistically captures
the original data's patterns.
Method
We propose a decoupled synthesis pipeline ,s e p a r a t i n gf e a t u r e( Xsyn)a n dt a r g e t( ysyn) generation, to replace the current
modulus pipeline outlined in Xu et al. [4].
Additionally, we investigate the impact of excluding the target y during the training of the feature generator (X synthesizerലͿon
downstream performance and resource usage.
1. Generate X syn using a chosen
generative model (e.g., CTGAN,
TVAE) trained on real features X
0
2. Train a predictive model (e.g.,
XGBoost, Random Forest) on the
original (X
0 ,y 0)d a t a
3. Use the trained target predictor to
generate ysyn based on Xsyn
Data Synthesis Pipelines Flowchart
